The story of the ninth tale of the eight night, as narrated by the parrot,
is a tale of a shopkeeper's wife’s infidelity. The tale begins with an interaction between
the shopkeeper’s wife and a young man who is besotted with her. The wife, infatuated
by the young man, invites him to join her later that night under the tree
in her court-yard. That night, the woman leaves her own bed to meet her
lover and meets him under the tree in the court-yard. After having had a
romantic encounter there, the shopkeeper’s wife and the young man fall asleep together. The specific
items that sit beneath the bed where the shop-keeper’s wife and her lover lie
in the court-yard imply much about their encounter. There are five items: a “pitcher
and basin for water, a dish of breath-freshening and mildly narcotic pan leaves, along
with bottles of perfumes” (Cleveland Art Museum 2019, web). These items, which are commonly
used during a love-affair, suggest feelings of lust and sensuality in this painting. They
allow for a better understanding of what type of relationship the two people on the
bed have. It just so happens that after a late-night business affair, the shop-keeper’s
father goes outside of the house. He finds his son’s wife sleeping with another man
and decides to steal her golden anklet in order to prove her infidelity to his
son. The shop-keeper’s wife sees her father-in-law’s actions and realizes that she
has been caught being unfaithful to her husband. This is the part of the story
depicted in the first painting. The shopkeeper’s father is in the bottom left corner of
the painting walking away with his son’s wife’s golden anklet. Knowing what her father-in-law
had done, the shopkeeper’s wife concocts a plan. She tells her lover to leave and
goes to her husband where he sleeps inside. She tells her husband that she is
feeling very hot and that they should go sleep outside in the garden to cool
down, in the exact same place where she and her lover had been sleeping. In
the second painting, the shopkeeper and his wife are depicted sleeping the same bed. While
sleeping outside, his wife wakes him to tell him that she had just seen his
father steal her golden anklet. She acts very upset about what her father-in-law
did and makes the incident seem very believable. In the morning, the shopkeeper’s father approaches
his son and tells him what he had witnessed the night before. The son, angry
at his father’s accusation, told him that it was he who had been sleeping in
the court-yard with his wife. The father was very sorry, and the wife escaped
the situation punishment free because of her cunning ways. A line from the translation of
the Tutinama that corresponds perfectly to the setting of this tale is: “when the sun
was gone down, and the moon, the fixed stars, and the planets appeared.” The starry
sky depicted in the second painting is an accurate depiction of the story’s rich description
of the night.